Overview
========

Planet Wars is a game based on [Galcon](http://www.galcon.com), but is
designed to be a simpler target for bots. The contest version of the
game is for two players.

A game of Planet Wars takes place on a map which contains several
planets, each of which has some number of ships on it. Each planet may
have a different number of ships. The planets may belong to one of
three different owners: you, your opponent, or neutral. The game has a
certain maximum number of turns. At the time of this writing, the
maximum number of turns on the official server is 200, but it is not
yet a part of the specification. Provided that neither player performs
an invalid action, the player with the most ships at the end of the
game wins. The game may also end earlier if one of the players loses
all his ships, in which case the player that has ships remaining wins
instantly. If both players have the same number of ships when the game
ends, it's a draw.

On each turn, the player may choose to send fleets of ships from any
planet he owns to any other planet on the map. He may send as many
fleets as he wishes on a single turn as long as he has enough ships to
supply them. After sending fleets, each planet owned by a player (not
owned by neutral) will increase the forces there according to that
planet's "growth" rate. Different planets have different growth
rates. The fleets will then take some number of turns to reach their
destination planets, where they will then fight any opposing forces
there and, if they win, take ownership of the planet. Fleets cannot be
redirected during travel. Players may continue to send more fleets on
later turns even while older fleets are in transit.

The Map
=======

Maps have no particular dimensions and are defined completely in terms
of the planets and fleets in them.

Planets
-------

Planet *positions* are specified relative to a common origin in
Euclidean space. The coordinates are given as floating point
numbers. Planets never move and are never added or removed as the game
progresses. Planets are not allowed to occupy the exact same position
on the map.

The *owner* of a planet can be neutral, player 1, or player 2. Players
always see themselves as player 1 and their opponents as player 2. The
engine works out how to display the world differently to each
player. The owner of a planet can change throughout the game. The
owner is given as an integer with the following mapping:

  * 0 means neutral
  * 1 means player 1 (yourself, from your point of view)
  * 2 means player 2 (your opponent, from your point of view)

The *number of ships* is given as an integer, and it may change
throughout the game.

The *growth rate* of the planet is the number of ships added to the
planet after each turn. If the planet is currently owned by neutral,
the growth rate is not applied. Only players can get new ships through
growth. The growth rate of a planet will never change. It is given as
an integer.

Each planet is also implicitly assigned an *ID*. These are assigned as
integers according to the order in which the planets are specified in
the map, starting from 0. A planet's ID will never change throughout
the game.

Fleets
------

The *owner* is represented in the same way as for planets, and the
*number of ships* is again an integer.

The *source planet* and *destination planet* are specified according
to the planets' IDs as specified above.

The *total trip length* is given as an integer, representing the total
number of turns required to make the trip from source to
destination. The *turns remaining* is also an integer, representing
the number of turns left from the current turn to arrive at the
destination. Trip lengths are determined at the time of departure by
taking the Euclidean distance to the destination $\langle \mathrm{dx},
\mathrm{dy} \rangle$ from the source $\langle \mathrm{sx}, \mathrm{sy}
\rangle$ and rounding up. That is, $\lceil \sqrt{(\mathrm{dx} -
\mathrm{sx})^2 + (\mathrm{dy} - \mathrm{sy})^2} \rceil$.

File Format
-----------

The map file format is fairly simple. Each line may be blank, a
planet, or a fleet, and each line is separated by Unix style line
breaks (LF, not CR or CRLF). The `#` character and everything on the
same line after it are treated as white space (comments), so a line
beginning with a `#` character is considered blank, too.

Planet lines have the following format:

    P <x:float> <y:float> <owner:int> <ships:int> <growth:int>

Fleet lines have the following format:

    F <owner:int> <ships:int> <source:int> <destination:int> <total_turns:int> <remaining_turns:int>

Here is an example of a valid map:

    # Example map
    
    P 0    0    1 34 2  # Player one's home planet.
    P 7    9    2 34 2  # Player two's home planet.
    P 3.14 2.71 0 15 5  # A neutral planet with real-number coordinates.
    
    F 1 15 0 1 12 2     # Player one has sent some ships to attack player two.
    F 2 28 1 2  8 4     # Player two has sent some ships to take over the neutral planet.

In the above example, player 1's planet has ID 0, player 2's planet
has ID 1, and the neutral planet has ID 2. In addition to the forces
owned by each of the two players on the planets themselves, the two
players each have fleets in transit. Player 1 has a fleet of 15 ships
that is about to arrive at player 2's home planet. Player 2 has a
fleet of 28 ships that is half way to the neutral planet.

Map files should not contain fleet lines, but this format is also used
for game state updates, as will be described below, so the fleet lines
are included in the specification here.

About the Current Maps
----------------------

Most maps on the server and in the starter packs were generated
programmatically by a
[Python script](http://code.google.com/p/ai-contest/source/browse/trunk/planet_wars/backend/map_generator.py). You
may also create your own to use for testing.

Turns
=====

The game engine performs the following steps repeatedly:

  1. Send the game state to the players.
  2. Receive orders from both players.
  3. Update the game state.
  4. Check for endgame conditions.

There is an unspecified maximum turn limit. At the time of this
writing, the maximum is 200 turns, but this may change. The intent is
to have this number nailed down later in the contest period.

A *turn* is defined as the above four steps. They are performed up to
200 times and then the game stops. This means that the players receive
the game state up to 200 times and send sets of orders up to 200
times.

Bot I/O
-------

The engine on the official server launches your bot in a sandbox
environment and communicates with it via stdin and stdout. It silently
absorbs your stderr stream, and your bot is prohibited from writing to
files. A single game is a single instance of your bot process. That
is, the same bot process is used from turn to turn in a single game,
but an entirely different process is used for a new game. The
unofficial engines may have their own ways of handling these things,
so if you are testing with a different engine you are responsible for
being aware of these details on a per case basis.

At the beginning of each turn, the engine sends the map state to both
bots. The format of this map is the same as the map file format
specified under "The Map" section above. The end of the game state is
denoted by a single line containing the text "`go`". For example, the
same map example from earlier might look like this:

    # Example map
    
    P 0    0    1 34 2  # Player one's home planet.
    P 7    9    2 34 2  # Player two's home planet.
    P 3.14 2.71 0 15 5  # A neutral planet with real-number coordinates.
    
    F 1 15 0 1 12 2     # Player one has sent some ships to attack player two.
    F 2 28 1 2  8 4     # Player two has sent some ships to take over the neutral planet.
    go

It's unlikely that the engine will include comments in this output,
but I wouldn't rely on it not to. Note also that because planet IDs
never change, the planets in the bot input will be in the same order
from turn to turn.

Once the engine starts sending the game state to the bots, the bots
each have 1 second of wall-clock time to receive the game state,
process it, and send their orders. (An additional two seconds is given
after launching the bots but before sending them the game state. This
was previously reported as having a longer first turn, but since the
map is not given, no processing is possible for these two
seconds. This is just to help bots written in languages whose VMs need
some "warm-up" time.) Both bots perform these operations concurrently,
and they are each unaware of what the other bot is doing. The choice
of using wall-clock time rather than CPU time is primarily due to
technical difficulties in measuring child processes' CPU times in real
time. If a simple way to monitor CPU time instead is discovered, this
part of the spec may change.

### Bot Orders

An "order" is a line of text that the bot sends to the engine to make
a fleet depart from a planet on the next game state update. The format
of this line is as follows:

    <source:int> <destination:int> <ships:int>

If the source and destination planets are the same, the bot instantly
loses the game. If the number of ships is greater than is available at
the source planet, the bot instantly loses the game. If the bot
doesn't own the source planet, the bot instantly loses the game. The
bot may issue as many orders in a single turn as it likes so long as
the sum of all ships in fleets leaving a planet is not greater than
the ships residing on the planet.

When the bot is done issuing commands to the engine, it sends a single
"`go`" line. Here is an example of the output from a bot for a single
turn:

    1 17 50
    4 17 50
    go

That means the bot wants to send 50 ships from planet 1 to planet 17
and 50 ships from planet 4 to planet 17.

Game State Update
-----------------

After receiving complete lists of commands from the players, the
engine then updates the game state, advancing the game to the next
turn. This happens in three phases: departure, advancement, and
arrival.

### Departure

In this phase, the players' commands are carried out. This consists of
creating new fleets and removing the appropriate numbers of ships from
each planet. Fleet trip lengths are determined by taking the Euclidean
distance to the destination from the source and rounding up.

### Advancement

This phase advances fleets and grows populations. Fleets are advanced
by simply decrementing their "turns remaining" values.

For each planet, if it is owned by a player, its growth rate is added
to its number of ships. For example, if the planet is owned by player
1, has 4 ships, and has a growth rate of 2, the planet will next have
6 ships, still having its growth rate of 2 and still being owned by
player 1. However, had the planet been owned by neutral instead, its
population would not have grown.

### Arrival

This phase handles fleets whose "turns remaining" became zero during
the advancement phase. It does so by considering each destination
planet at a time.

For each planet, consider its owner and ship count along with the
owners and ship counts of each fleet. We will call each of these
groups a "force." Combine the forces according to their owners. For
example, if the planet is owner by player 1 with a population of 5
ships, two of player 1's fleets are arriving with 3 ships each, and
two of player 2's fleets are arriving with 5 ships each, the result of
this operation gives us a force owned by player 1 consisting of 11
ships and a force owned by player 2 consisting of 10 ships.

If there is only one force, that is the new occupation of the planet.

If there are two forces, the new owner of the planet is the owner of
the largest force, and the losing player's ship count is subtracted
from the winning player's ship count as the new population. However,
if both forces are the same size, then the winner is the original
owner of the planet, and the planet's new ship count is zero.

If the original owner of the planet was neutral, then it is possible
for there to be three forces fighting for one planet. In this case,
the owner of the largest force is the new owner of the planet, and his
ship count is reduced by the number of ships in the second largest
force. If the top two forces are the same size, the original owner
retains ownership of the planet but the forces are set to zero.

There is an intuitive way to understand these rules. Let's look at the
rules with an example. Say player 1 has a force of 5 ships, player 2
has a force of 4 ships, and neutral has a force of 3 ships. We create
groups of units that will battle, each group consisting of two ships
from different forces or of three ships all from different forces. In
this case, the division is as follows:

  * P1 vs. P2 vs. N
  * P1 vs. P2 vs. N
  * P1 vs. P2 vs. N
  * P1 vs. P2
  * P1

Each group of two or three fighting ships cancels out. In this battle,
player 1 wins with a single ship left.

If we apply the original procedure to the above battle, we use the
three-way rules. The two largest forces are player 1's and player
2's. The winner must be player 1 because he has the most ships, and we
subtract player 2's ships from player 1's to obtain the new ship
count, $5-4 = 1$.

In actuality, all three cases for one, two and three forces follow the
same procedure. In all cases, the largest force wins, and the second
largest force is subtracted from the first, and in the case of a tie
the original owner keeps the planet with zero ships remaining. A
critical detail is that if forces completely cancel out then the
original owner retains the planet.

Endgame Conditions
==================

The following conditions will cause the game to end:

  * The turn limit is reached. The winner is the player with the most
    ships, both on planets and in fleets. If both players have the
    same number of ships, it's a draw.
  * One player runs out of ships entirely. The winner is the other
    player.
  * Both players run out of ships at the same time. The game is a
    draw.
  * A bot issues a command with the same source and destination planet
    and forfeits the game.
  * A bot sends invalid data and forfeits the game.
  * A bot crashes and forfeits the game.
  * A bot exceeds the time limit without completing its orders (it
    never sends a line that says "`go`") and is disqualified. This is
    perhaps overly harsh, but is the way it currently works. It may
    change in the future to simply be a forfeit.
  * A bot attempts to do something that the tournament manager deems a
    security issue and is disqualified.

More Information
================

If you have a question about the game mechanics, you may ask in the
[forums](http://ai-contest.com/forum/), ask in the #aichallenge IRC
channel on Freenode, or go straight to the contest's
[source code](http://code.google.com/p/ai-contest/source/browse/#svn/trunk/planet_wars).
